# Semantic Components

## Basic Principles:

1. You will never beat the speed of the browser.  No matter how optimized your Javascript code is, HTML and CSS are just faster.  Browser companies spend all their
time making rendering more efficient, and they're using device native code to do it.

   > Just because you're holding a Javascript hammer, doesn't mean most web problems
   are nails.

2. The foundation is *Semantic HTML*.  Learn all of the HTML 5 tags and use them
   correctly to model the content you're presenting.

   > Accessible web pages begin with semantic HTML.

3. Design for mobile first.  Then determine how the page will work at larger sizes.
   If the mobile experience is good, you have a good foundation to start from.

   > Almost everyone uses a device these days.  Design and develop for what they have in their hands.

4. If you can make it interactive with CSS, do that first. Javascript should be a
   last resort.  Learn CSS, don't just tolerate it.  Learn to embrace the cascade.

   > CSS does more than you think it does.

5. Load order is important. CSS must be in the page before the HTML renders, or you get a flash of unstyled content.  Javascript must be loaded before your event handlers work, so don't make that last step take more than
a few milliseconds.

   > CSS *then* HTML *then* JavaScript.

## CSS in JS is Problematic

Look I get it, you like JSX. It's nice to see the whole component in one file, so
 you can see what you're building.  It feels nice to develop a component that way.
 Plus lots of editors make JSX faux HTML look like real HTML.

But you know JSX is lying to you right?  That's not real HTML.  Plus, it loads stuff in the wrong order by default.

## What about Web Components?

Given these principles, I'd like to discuss how to make Web Components work as well as we can.  Web components
add a few more ideas into the mix.

### Shadow DOM
styles how do they load?

### Hybrid rendering
Javascript AND native portions

## Stencil, lit, Vue, React
